<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>“Pardon, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> but may I ask you if you are from Tokyo?”</p>
			<p>“Do I look from Tokyo?”</p>
			<p>“Look? Why a glance⁠ ⁠… your language tells.”</p>
			<p>“Can you tell where in Tokyo?”</p>
			<p>“Well, that is a puzzler; Tokyo is so large.⁠ ⁠… Let me see. You cannot be from downtown. You must belong to uptown. The uptown parts are⁠ ⁠… Kojimachi, eh? Or Koishikawa? If not, you must be from Ushigome or Yotsuya?”</p>
			<p>“Somewhere around there. You seem to know Tokyo well?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I am Tokyo-born, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, look what I may.”</p>
			<p>“No wonder, I thought you looked a city man.”</p>
			<p>“Aha, he, he, he, it is all up with a fellow, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, when he comes down to this.”</p>
			<p>“What made you to drift into a place like this?”</p>
			<p>“You are right, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, it is drifted that I have done. I had gone down so low that I could not go lower, and had to say goodbye to Tokyo.”</p>
			<p>“You ran a barbershop from the beginning?”</p>
			<p>“No, not ran, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, I am only a journeyman barber. There is a block named Matsunagacho, a dingy small place⁠ ⁠… a gentleman like you don’t know it, of course. But Ryukan-bashi⁠ ⁠… you don’t know that either, eh? It is a pretty well known bridge.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I say, give me little more soap, won’t you? It hurts.”</p>
			<p>“It hurts? I am very particular about shaving, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>. I never consider my work done, until I have gone over along and then gone over contrariwise, cutting each individual hair at the very root. No, what the latter-day barbers do is not shaving but letting the razor slide over the face. Bear it a bit more and you will be done.”</p>
			<p>“Bear I have done, quite a while now. There is a good fellow, put some warm water, if not soap.”</p>
			<p>“You can stand no longer? My shaving never hurts. The fact is, you have allowed your beard to grow too long without shaving.”</p>
			<p>The barber reluctantly let go my cheek, which he was pinching with the force of clinched nippers, and taking down a thin apology of a red cake of soap, he had no sooner wetted it in a basin of water than he went all over my face with it. To have a piece of soap applied directly to the skin of my face was one of my rarest experiences in barber shops, and I was not over-pleased to see that the water in which the soap was dipped had the appearance of having stood there for some days!</p>
			<p>Sitting in a barber’s chair, I was called upon, in vindication of my right as a customer, to look into a mirror. I have been thinking, for sometime, however, if I should not waive this right. A mirror owes it to itself that its surface is perfectly even and flat, and the image it reflects shall be faithful to the original. If the owner of a mirror, which is not possessed of this common quality, forces you to look into it, you may charge him, as you will a poor photographer, with intentionally injuring your looks. Snubbing the vain may serve cultural purposes; but I fail to see the justice of insulting you by calling a reflection your face, which makes a mockery of it. The mirror, which I was expected to exercise patience to look into, has decidedly been insulting me. I slightly turn my face right, and the mirror makes all nose of it. I turn left, and my mouth extends clear up to the ears. I look a perfect picture of a crushed toad, when I turn my eyes upward. My head elongates itself limitlessly, the moment I incline it ever so little forward. I must make of myself monsters of all imaginable variety as long as I sit before this mirror. Who can say that I was not undergoing a torture?</p>
			<p>Moreover, this barber was no common barber. He appeared human enough, when I first looked in, and saw him depositing tobacco ashes from his long pipe on a toy flag of Anglo-Japanese Alliance, apparently feeling very wearisome. But fear crept into me, the moment I walked in and gave him the custody of my head; for a doubt arose in me whether the right of ownership of my cranium and parts appertaining passed completely to him or whether I still retained a small fraction of it myself. His handling of my head! I felt that it could not remain there much longer, even if it were nailed onto my shoulders.</p>
			<p>His manner of using the razor showed him to be a perfect stranger to the rules of civilization. The weapon made a most bloodcurdling sound, when scraping across my cheek. As it came to the tuft of hair by the ear, the artery almost snapped. About the chin, it sported itself making a noise as of somebody crunching the frost raised ground. The most dreadful part of the story was that this barber considered himself the most skilful tonsor in the land.</p>
			<p>Lastly, the man was well loaded with something of fairly strong flavour. Every time he said <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, a smell accompanied the word and a gust of highly-charged gas attacked my nose. At this rate there was no telling when or where his razor might make a jaunt of its own. The man using it having no definite plan to guide him, it was impossible that I, who placed my head in his custody, should have any idea of it. I should not grumble as my head was in his hands as part of a legitimate understanding. But what, if he should change his mind and set about cutting my throat?</p>
			<p>“It is only fellows who are not sure of their hand that use soap. But it cannot be helped, perhaps, in your case, because you are too hairy, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>.” So protesting my man put the soap back to the shelf; but disobeying his wish, it fell to the clay floor.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think I have seen much of you around here, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>. You have come here lately?”</p>
			<p>“Why, yes, I came here, only a few days ago.”</p>
			<p>“Is that so? Where are you stopping?”</p>
			<p>“At Shiota Hotel.”</p>
			<p>“You are a guest at Shiota, are you? That was what I thought. To tell you the truth I came here looking for help from the old gentleman of Shiota. I used to know him, located near him as I was, while he lived in Tokyo. He is a fine old man, knowing what is what. He lost his wife last year, and he now passes most of his time in toying with his curios and things. He is said to have great things, which would bring in a good little fortune if sold.”</p>
			<p>“Has he not got a pretty daughter?”</p>
			<p>“Look out, there!”</p>
			<p>“What for?”</p>
			<p>“Why? You may not know it, but she is a divorcee.”</p>
			<p>“So, eh?”</p>
			<p>“You don’t seem to make much of it, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>; but it was an affair. It was not at all necessary that she should take a divorce.⁠ ⁠… The bank busted and she left her husband, because she could no longer go in for a high living. She may be all right, as long as the old man is there; but if anything should happen to him, she would be lost in the sea.”</p>
			<p>“You think so?”</p>
			<p>“Of course I do, and she and her elder brother, who is now the head of the family are no friends at all.”</p>
			<p>“The head of the family?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, the old man is retired, and family affairs are in the charge of his son, who lives upon the hill. It is a fine place he lives in, with a most beautiful view. You should have a look at it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, say give me another coat of soap. It is hurting again.”</p>
			<p>“Your skin must be very soft. It is because your beard is too tough. You must have a shave at least once in three days. If my shave hurts you, you can’t stand it anywhere else.”</p>
			<p>“I shall do so in future. Or I may have it every day.”</p>
			<p>“You are going to stay so long? Do you know that you are running a risk? I should say, don’t. No good will come out of it. You don’t know what trouble you will bring upon yourself by getting tangled up in a silly affair.”</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, that woman is pretty to look at; but you must know that she is not right in the head.”</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>“Why? The villagers all say she is crazy.”</p>
			<p>“There must be some mistake about that.”</p>
			<p>“No, we have a proof that it is not. Don’t, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, it is risky.”</p>
			<p>“I am perfectly safe. What kind of proof do you have?”</p>
			<p>“Well, it is a queer affair. Light a cigarette and take your time, and I shall tell.⁠ ⁠… Will you have a shampoo?”</p>
			<p>“No thanks.”</p>
			<p>“Let me then shake off the dandruff a little.”</p>
			<p>The barber put his ten fingers, which ended in well grown nails, loaded with goodly deposits of dirt, upon my cranium, and set them in motion most violently, forward and backward. The formidable nails ploughed the root of each hair in my head like a rake in the hand of a giant combing a field of wild grass with the power and swiftness of a hurricane. I do not know how many hundreds of thousands of hair there are in my head; I only felt that every one of my capillary growth was being uprooted, leaving the skin in wales, in addition to making the skull and the grey matter of brains vibrate most violently. So strongly did the man rummage my head.</p>
			<p>“How do you feel, now? Wasn’t that good?”</p>
			<p>“You went at it pretty lively.”</p>
			<p>“Eh? Everybody feels clear in head after my scrub.”</p>
			<p>“I feel as if my head is dropping away.”</p>
			<p>“You are feeling so tired? It is the weather does it. Spring makes you feel lazy. Have a smoke. You must feel lonesome, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>, stopping alone at Shiota? You must drop in to see me. The Tokyo-born likes the Tokyo-born. Your talk won’t fall in with others. Does the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">O-Jo-san</i> come out to say nice things to you? The trouble with her is she is all mixed up about right and wrong.”</p>
			<p>“You were going to say something about <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">O-Jo-san</i>, and then you went about scrubbing my head and I felt as it was coming off.”</p>
			<p>“That was so. My head is so empty and I skip about so. I was going to say that the priest fell head over ears in love with her.”</p>
			<p>“The priest? What priest?”</p>
			<p>“The priestling of Kaikanji, of course.”</p>
			<p>“You haven’t said a word about a priest, full-fledged or half fledged.”</p>
			<p>“Haven’t I? I am so hasty, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>. The priest, that priestling, was good in looks, of a cast that girls like. This <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">bozu</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> became, I tell you, smitten by her of Shiota and at last wrote her a love letter.⁠ ⁠… Wait a bit, did he go at it himself? No, it was, he wrote.⁠ ⁠… Let me see.⁠ ⁠… I am getting mixed up.⁠ ⁠… No, I am all right, I’ve got it⁠ ⁠… so was in fright and consternation.”</p>
			<p>“Who was in fright and consternation?”</p>
			<p>“The woman, of course.”</p>
			<p>“By receiving the letter?”</p>
			<p>“That would be a saving grace if she were. But she is not of the kind to get scared.”</p>
			<p>“Who was it really, then, that was in fright and consternation?”</p>
			<p>“Why, he that spoke to her of his love.”</p>
			<p>“I thought he did not go at it personally.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, chuck it. It is all wrong. By receiving the letter, can’t you see?”</p>
			<p>“Why then it must be the woman, who was in fright and consternation.”</p>
			<p>“No, the man.”</p>
			<p>“If man, then it must be the priest?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, the priest, of course.”</p>
			<p>“But what scared him so?”</p>
			<p>“What scared him? Why, he, the priest, was in the temple assisting the abbot in the afternoon service. Then all of a sudden, the woman rushed into the temple.⁠ ⁠… Lord, she must be off a great deal.”</p>
			<p>“Did she do anything?”</p>
			<p>“ ‘If I am so dear to you, come let us make love before our all mighty Buddha,’ she said and hugged him by the neck!”</p>
			<p>“Ho?”</p>
			<p>“Consternation was no word, for poor Taian, the priest. He got all the shame he wanted by writing to a lunatic, and, disappearing that night, he died.”</p>
			<p>“Died?”</p>
			<p>“At least I think he must have killed himself. He could not have outlived the shame.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about that.”</p>
			<p>“Maybe he is still living somewhere. Death would not have come out so well, the other party being a mad woman.”</p>
			<p>“Very interesting, indeed.”</p>
			<p>“Interesting is no word for it. Why the affair set the whole village a-roaring with laughter. But the woman, being off her mind, was all indifference as she still is. All will be well for a man so sober like you, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>; but the party being what she is, you don’t know what mess you will get into, if you try to flirt with her.”</p>
			<p>“I have got to be careful, eh? Ha, ha, ha!”</p>
			<p>The Spring breeze came lazily wafting from the genially warm beach, and set the entrance curtain of the barber’s shop flapping sleepily, and a swallow cast its flitting shadow in the mirror before me, as it dived under the curtain with its body half turned. Under the eve of a house on the other side of the road, a sexagenarian sat squatting on a slightly raised seat, and was busy shelling bivalves in silence. Every time a small knife went in between shells, a small flabby lump fell into a basket, and the empty shells were thrown away, two feet across the gossamer, there adding to the height of a sparkling heap. Now and again the heap collapsed, sending the oyster, clam, and other shells down into a small brook, to be buried forever in its sandy bed. In no time the heap grew again under a willow tree; but the old man was too busy to think of a life beyond molluscs; he only went on throwing meatless shells upon gossamer. His basket seemed to be bottomless and his Spring day endless.</p>
			<p>The sandy stream ran under a twelve yard bridge, carrying the warm water of Spring toward the sea shore. Down where Spring’s water joined the tide of the sea, numberless fishing nets were drying in the sun, hanging from erect poles of longer or shorter lengths and were giving, one might suspect, a fish-smelling warmth to the soft breeze wafting towards the village through their meshes. And one saw between them the placid face of the sea, undulating slowly like molten lead.</p>
			<p>No harmony was possible between this scenery and my barber. If he were a man of strong personality, strong enough to impress me as powerfully as the scenery around, I should have been struck with a sense of great incongruity. Fortunately, however, my man was not so striking a character. However Tokyo-born, however high-spiritedly he might talk, he was no match for the all genial and all embracing influence of nature. My barber has been essaying to break up this all subjugating power of nature with all his caustic effervescences; but instead he has been swallowed up and was floating in the light wave of Spring, not leaving a trace of the loud-talking Tokyo-born barber. Inconsistency is a phenomenon to be found between persons or things of equal standing, but possessed of hopeless incompatibility in strength, spirit or physique. When distance is very great between the two, inconsistency wears out, and will, instead, assume activity only as part of a superior power. Thus it happens that cleverness becomes a willing servant of greatness; the unintelligent of the clever; and horses and cattle of the unintelligent. My barber is making a comic exhibition of himself, with the beautiful scenery of Spring for his background. He who tries to spoil the calm Springy feeling is only adding to the profundity of that feeling. This man of very cheap vaporing cannot but prove after all a colour in full harmony with the Spring afternoon, which is symbolic of gloriousness.</p>
			<p>My man would make rather a good picture, and poetry, too, when studied in this light, and I stayed talking with him long after my shave was over, when a small head of a young priest put in an appearance, slipping in by the entrance curtain and said:</p>
			<p>“A shave please.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></p>
			<p>The newcomer was a jolly-looking little priest in an old-fashioned grey cotton clothes, held together by a coil of light but cotton-wadded belt, under a mosquito-net-like cloak.</p>
			<p>“You got a scolding, didn’t you, the other day, for loafing, Ryonen-san?”</p>
			<p>“No, I was complimented.”</p>
			<p>“Complimented for catching minnows on your way to an errand, were you?”</p>
			<p>“The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i> praised me, saying: ‘You did well Ryonen, to take your time in play, young though you are.’ ”</p>
			<p>“That accounts, eh? You have got many swellings in your head. Too much trouble to shave a bumpy head like this; but I let you off this time. Don’t come again with a freak of a head like this.”</p>
			<p>“Thanks, I shall go to a better barber when my head is in good shape.”</p>
			<p>“Ha, ha, ha, this zigzag thing has got a tongue to talk with to be sure.”</p>
			<p>“Poor in work, but quite up in boozing, that is what you are, arn’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Poor in work? Say it again.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Not I, but it is the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i> who says it. Don’t get so mad, if you know how old you are.”</p>
			<p>“Humph, the idea! Isn’t that so <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>?”</p>
			<p>“Ya⁠—eh?”</p>
			<p>“Priests, they live high above the stone steps, and have nothing much to look after. That must be what makes them so free in tongue. Even this little fellow can talk so. There lay down your head⁠—lay down, I say, do you hear? I will cut you if you don’t do as I tell you. You understand? The red thing will run.”</p>
			<p>“It hurts! Don’t be so rough.”</p>
			<p>“If you can’t stand this sort of thing, how can you expect to be a priest?”</p>
			<p>“I am one already.”</p>
			<p>“But not full feathered yet. Oh, say, by the way, how did Taian-san die?”</p>
			<p>“Taian-san is not dead.”</p>
			<p>“Not dead? He must be dead.”</p>
			<p>“Taian-san has got a new spirit and is now hard at his study at Taibaiji temple in Rikuzen. Everybody expects he will make a great priest by and by. A very good thing, indeed.”</p>
			<p>“What is good? Priests may have their way; but it cannot be good even for them to decamp at night? You ought to be careful, you young one, it is woman who brings you trouble. Speaking of a woman, does that crazy thing still come to the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i>?”</p>
			<p>“I have never heard of a woman named ‘Crazy Thing.’ ”</p>
			<p>“You blockhead, tell me, does she come or does she not.”</p>
			<p>“No crazy woman comes; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shiota’s daughter comes.”</p>
			<p>“The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i> may be great; but he won’t be able to make anything of the poor girl. She is possessed by her former husband.”</p>
			<p>“That lady is a very worthy woman. The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i> speaks highly of her.”</p>
			<p>“That beats all. Everything is topsy-turvy up there, above the stone steps. Whatever the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i> may say, the mad must be mad⁠—Here now, all shaved. Hurry home and get another scolding.”</p>
			<p>“No, not yet. I shall take little more time to get a good opinion of the <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Do as you please, you long-tongued brat.”</p>
			<p>“Go on, you dry rot.”</p>
			<p>“What!”</p>
			<p>But the clean shaved head dived under and was on the other side of the curtain, the Spring breeze softly fanning it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
