<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Noh is a peculiarly Japanese stage performance of ancient origin, from which sprang the latter-day theatrical plays. It is presented on its own stage to the enjoyment of those who love to see human actions reduced to dreamy gracefulness, beautiful curves, and melodious sweetness. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Basho Matsuo was the founder of his own school of Hokku and one of the most famous poets Japan has produced. He was a seer in his way. Born in <time>1644</time>, he died in <time>1694</time>. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hokku, also called Haiku, is an ode consisting of only 17 Japanese kana syllables, and makes a point of compressing into a couple of lines an impression made by the outside world, thoughts aroused by an event, sentiments felt and all else that affects human heart. In fact, everything that carries poetical sentiments and is uttered in poetical tune within 17 syllables makes a hokku. It may be a mere whim, an instantaneous impression, or else a very deep thought; but a good hokku is always rich in colour and profound in idea, which it leaves unsaid but only hints, and at least arouses a train of fancies in the reader. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna-sama</i> is a term originally adopted from Sanscrit <i xml:lang="sa-Latn">Dana</i>, meaning “exhibition of charity” and is used in addressing a man of position. Stands for English Sir, Master, or Your Honour; but nearer French Monsieur. Less formally it takes the form of <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna-san</i> or simply <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna</i>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A small yellowish-green warbler, that sings with a peculiarly sweet note, generally but wrongly identified with the English nightingale. The <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">uguisu</i> never sings at night, as does the English bird, except as a caged captive under a paper cover, with a light burning near. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Means an old woman or a grandmother with an honorific <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">O</i>; <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Bah-san</i> is less formal. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Inen was a disciple of Basho and a passionate lover of nature in her quietude. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Hark, the packhorse bells in the Spring breeze,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Even as they jingled in Inen’s ear.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A rustic air sung by a <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">mago</i> or packhorse driver and the like, always arousing pastoral associations of peace and care-freeness. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“List, <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">mago-uta</i>, grey hair undyed</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Spring is going again.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Oba</i> means aunt and <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">san</i> a honorific affix less formal than <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">sama</i>. <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Oba-san</i> is used in its broadest sense as is aunt. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aki is the name of a woman; in this case that of the old woman’s married daughter. <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">O</i> and <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">san</i> are respectively an honorific prefix and affix. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Jo</i> is daughter with the honorific <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">sama</i>, which becomes <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">san</i> less formally. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Wise that the bride went</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">After the flower season on horse back.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>This haiku was probably suggested by an old ditty: “Why tie a horse to a blossoming cherry tree? The flowers will scatter if spirited the horse becomes.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Same as <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">O-Bah-san</i>, only less polite. See <a href="#note-6">6</a>. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Even like the dew drop</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">That when autumn comes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lodges trembling on grass</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">So must I roll off to die.”</span>
							<br/>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Obi is a lined belt, made of fabric of various texture used over the kimono, going two or three times round the waist. The Japanese woman’s obi is often made of very beautiful material, and is about eight-tenths of a foot in width and thirteen feet or so in length, so that it is a ponderous affair to wear round the waist. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The semi-transparent paper screen, sliding in grooves and serving the purposes of light-admitting doors in Japanese houses. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The crazy thing, it shakes dew-drops off the aronia?” A blossoming aronia wet in rain is often sung as a beauty in ablution. Crazy must therefore be any one who shakes dew drop off an aronia in bloom. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Shadow of a flower; shadow of a woman; both so misty!” An instantaneous picture of woman standing by a blossoming tree in the dim moonlight. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The Reynard in woman’s guise, the moon so misty.” The fox is often spoken of as “Shoichii,” which is the title of the Inari god, who is always associated with the animal. The fancy here is that the moon being so soft and dim that it will give the cunning animal an opportunity to assume a human figure, and the woman may be a fox in disguise. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“A garland she makes of the midnight stars of Spring.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“It is Beauty loosening and bathing her hair in the clouds of a Spring night.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Spring’s night this, how fair the singing one.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Spirit of aronia lured out even the moon-lit night.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Song rises and falls, with Spring sauntering under the moon.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“How so alone, when fullest Spring is ripening!” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Same as shoji, only mounted with wall-paper like stuff and therefore heavier. It also moves in grooves and takes the place of a door in Japanese houses. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A shoji is often put in windows in Japanese houses. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Japan it is considered nothing extraordinary or improper for hotel maids or others of the sex, waiting on a guest, to help him to put on a kimono. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Zen is the name of a Buddhist sect, credited with rising above worldly trammels. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Dews on aronia fly; ’tis morning raven.” <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Shadowy the shadow of flower and the shadow of woman.” <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Shadow of flower doubled the shadow of woman.” <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“It is lordling in woman’s guise in misty moonlight.” <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The three stringed Japanese guitar, often called <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Sangen</i> nowadays. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Generally means a Buddhist priest, implying respect. <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Osho-san</i> is a less formal form. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Same as <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">karakami</i>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A term of widest application. Scholars, teachers, savants men of profession or of speciality are all Sensei. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Same as <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">Danna-sama</i>, only less polite. See <a href="#note-4">4</a>. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A round-head Buddhist priest, often pronounced “bonze” by Westerners. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Buddhist priests from the youngest to the oldest keep their head clean shaved all over. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Same as <i xml:lang="ja-Latn">karakami</i>. See <a href="#note-28">28</a>. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Even as the gate of heaven opens</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">In the Spring breeze, fair one!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Show what is in your heart.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
